---
layout: post
title: C++20 Contracts
published: true
tags: ["C++20","contracts"]
---

This post was inspired by Björn Fahller's talk during cpponsea 2019, "Programming with Contracts in C++20"

So. It's time to talk about contracts in c++20. But before that, we first need to talk about the fundamental software development approach,
design by contract.

The high level overview of Contracts in software engineering is that for any software component, or system, or function, 
can technically be described as a series of preconditions, postconditions, invariants, and side effects.

The is is similar to that of an actual contract, for example: Factory A agrees that as long as Client B provides factory A with the correct materials, 
Factory A will then produce some Product C for Client B.

Design by contract, however, insists that contracts are so important to ensuring a software's correctness, that you should write the assertions
first. There are 2 main ways that contracts are written during the design.
1. Comments - Clearly the weakest forms of ensuring that the contract is adhered to.
2. Test Cases - Test Driven Development(TDD) was basically made to ensure that contracts are adhered to. If the contract is not properly kept, 
then the code will fail.
3. Language features - Some languages have contracts built into their language. C++ will be bringing it in soon to the language during C++20.

Let us formally define the terms.
1. Precondition: An condition that the caller must satisfy in order for the program to be considered correct. 
In the event that a precondition is violated, the behavior of the section of code following is considered undefined.
2. Postcondition: A condition that must be true after the execution of some code or an operation.
3. Invariants: Something that has to be true for the duration of program execution.


And now let's say we want to have a simple stack array data structure.

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T, int N>
class array_stack
{
    queue();

    int size() const;

    const T& top() const;

    void push(T value);

    void pop();
};
{% endhighlight %}

## We should probably have defined some pre-condtions.

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T, int N>
class array_stack
{
    queue();

    int size() const;

    // requires: size() > 0
    const T& top() const;

    // requires: size() < N
    void push(T value);

    // requires: size() > 0
    void pop();
};
{% endhighlight %}

Notice that a default constructor doesn't have any preconditions.
It doesn't make much sense if a function that is made to construct an object, requires something to happen beforehand.
But we also should define some post conditions.

Here we just want some nice way to define post conditions in terms of their original value.
We short hand old_ for it.

## Comment method

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T, int N>
class array_stack
{
    // invariant : size() >= 0 && size() <= N
    // ensures: size() == 0
    queue();

    int size() const;

    // requires: size() > 0
    const T& top() const;

    // requires: size() < N
    // ensures: size() = old_size()+1
                top() = value
    void push(T value);

    // requires: size() > 0
    // ensures: size() == old_size - 1
                return == old_front()           
    T pop();
};
{% endhighlight %}

So we've listed down some specifications for our class.
Why is this important? It's important because if our code breaks, we can easily identify the culprit.
If a precondition fails, the client is clearly the one at fault. And for any other reason, it is the implementation at fault.

That's great that we wrote down our specifications for our class and all... But, to be very honest, those are just comments.
They don't really do anything right now. 

## So let's try to see how we would implement something in old C++.

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T, int N>
class array_stack
{
    // invariant : size() >= 0 && size() <= N
    // ensures: size() == 0
    queue():size(0)
    {
        // ... code here

        assert(size() == 0);
    }

    int size() const;

    // requires: size() > 0
    const T& top() const
    {
        assert(size() > 0);

        // ... code here.
    }

    // requires: size() < N
    // ensures: size() = old_size()+1
                top() = value
    void push(T value)
    {
        assert(size() < N);

        // ... code here

        assert(size() == old_size() + 1);
        assert(top() == value);
    }

    // requires: size() > 0
    // ensures: size() == old_size - 1
                return == old_front()           
    T pop()
    {
        assert(size() > 0)

        // ... code here

        assert(size() == old_size() - 1);
        assert(ret == old_front());
    }
};
{% endhighlight %}

And that's a rough skeletal implementation of how we would do it in c++ before we had contracts, using the old school assert macros that were
provided by the library. However there are a few issues with this. 
1. We now mix our contracts with our definitions.
- Imagine if we split our interface from implementation, there is no way for the user to know what the contract is unless he looks at the comment.
Which means that the contracts have to be maintained in both the comments in the interface file, and the code in the implementation file.
Double the work effort, and double the maintenance.

2. Because the C assert is a macro, it cannot handle templated style asserts easily. For example ```assert(std::is_same<T,int>::value)``` will not
work because of the ```","```, due to the way the preprocessor works. Ideally we want something similar to ```static_assert(std::is_same<T,int>::value)```
which is not a macro, and works nicely with c++ templates.

## So now let us look at the C++20 style of doing contracts.

{% highlight cpp %}
template<typename T, int N>
class array_stack
{
    // invariant : size() >= 0 && size() <= N

    queue()
    [[ ensures: size() == 0]];

    int size() const;

    const T& top() const 
    [[expects: size() > 0]];

    void push(T value) 
    [[expects: size() < N]] 
    //[[ensures: size() == old_size() + 1]] <- It would be nice if we could have a way to retrieve a previous state, 
    //                                         but we don't have a mechanism for that.
    [[ensures: size() > 0 ]] 
    [[ensures: top() == value]];
     
    T pop() 
    [[expects: size() > 0] 
    [[ensures: size() == old_size - 1]]] 
    //[[ensures: return == old_front]]      <- same here.
};
{% endhighlight %}

This is what the code would look like in c++20. It's not perfect, there are some contracts that cannot be expressed, whereas in our old C++
method, we could probably code in the old_size, and the old_front, and do the contract,but all in all, it allows for more expressiveness and
code maintainability.

We don't provide the implementation details here, but that is okay. Because once the 
contract has been established in the first declaration of the function, then the checks will be run, before and after the function is executed.
Meaning that you don't have to manually put ``` expects ``` and ```ensures ``` blocks inside your code.

Additionally, c++20 also provides us with ``` [[assert:x]] ```, a proper language construct to replace the old macro of the past. this allows
us to use it nicely with our templated code without going through roundabout hacks.

**Bonus features**
Remember how we can turn on and off asserts by defining a macro to set what our debug level was?
Well we now have the same contraption for contracts.

We have 3 settings that we can set for our contracts
1. default
2. audit
3. axiom: This is more for formal comments, and is never actually checked at runtime. It still needs to have functions declared to compile,
and can be used in conjuction with certain concepts.

We have 3 settings that we set on our compiler to police our contracts.
1. off : No contract checking is performed.
2. default : Checking is performed for contract whose contract-level is default.
3. audit: Checking is performed for contract-level is default or audit.

***Bonus features 2**
We can also customize our contract violation experience, by writing a function that handles the violation of type 

``` void handler_name(const std::contract_violation& v) ```
More info is available at

[Björn Fahller - Contracts](https://github.com/philsquared/cpponsea-slides/blob/master/2019/Bj%C3%B6rn%20Fahller%20-%20Contracts.pdf)
[Contract Violation](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/error/contract_violation)
[cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/attributes/contract)

To summarize, I believe that all along we should have be thinking in terms of preconditions, and postconditions. 
It is also the foundation of our unit tests. In some sense, what C++20 provides for us is a way to self-document our code,
and also provide micro-tests for out code within the code itself. This allows for better code maintenance and locality of error.
Obviously tests still have to be written to ensure system wide coherence, but at least there are more parts of the code that seems to be
more expressive and maintainable now.